Snowflake Question

1. Where are you using snowflakes? Are you transforming your data on Snowflake or you are using some AWS Services before injecting it into the Snowflake DWH?
2. Why do you think of choosing Snowflake other than Redshift which is native to AWS?
3. In Snowflake what do you think clustering by the closed group does?
4. Are you using snow pipe or a copy into a statement by loading the data from S3 to your Snowflake Warehouse?
5. For the copy commands are you running inside Snowflake or running inside airflow DAG?
6. What are the WH in Snowflake?
7. What are the different tables in Snowflake?
8. Currently which tables you have used in your DWH?
9. Are you also implementing the data models inside Snowflake? 
10. Are you implementing the star schema, snowflake schema or denormalized schema?
11. What do you think is the advantage of the snowflake schema over the star schema?
12. Have you also implemented SCDs in your DWH? If yes, then what are the different types of SCD?

-----------------
SQL Question

13. Given a weather table, write a SQL Query to find all date ids with higher temperatures compared to their previous (yesterday's) dates.

+----+------------+-------------+
| id. | recordDate | temperature |
+----+------------+-------------+
Check the Video for full SQL questions. Due to word limit, I am only giving a gist of SQL question that was asked

-----------------
Apache Spark Questions

14. What do you mean by client mode & cluster mode deployment? In production which mode should we use?
15. Difference between repartition & coalesce in spark
16. Have you used broadcast join in spark & when to apply broadcast join?
17. How to set a particular size of the broadcasting in Spark?
18. Suppose you have 2 df and one is hinting to df1.join and the other dataframe we are broadcasting it. And the second of having a 20 MB file and you have set the auto-config at 10 MB. So Will that lead to Broadcast joining or other joining?
19. According to your configuration will it be the one which will be preferred here instead of the Broadcasting?
20. Nisha shares 2 functions and Priya needs to identify which one is Action and which one is transformation. Identify Action and transformation from the spark code i.e. df.groupBy(“id”).count().count()
